How unlikely do you think life is on earth?
So when you look,
when you study other planets and you study the contents of other planets,
does that give you a perspective on, um, the origin of life on earth,
which again is full of mystery in itself, not the evolution, but the, or origin,
the first springing to life, like from, from nothing to life,
from the basic agrees to life. I,
I guess another way of asking it is how unique are we?
Yeah, it's a great question. And it's one that just scientifically,
we don't have an answer to, we,
you don't even know how many times life evolved on earth,
if it was only once or if it happened independently,
a thousand times in different places, uh,
we don't know whether it's happened anywhere else in the universe, although it,
it feels absurd to believe that we are the only life that evolved in the
entire universe, but it's conceivable.
We just have just no real information.
We don't understand really how life came about in the first place on earth.
I mean, so if you look at the Drake equation that tries to estimate how many
alien civilizations are out there,
planets have a big part to play in that equation.
If you were to bet money, uh, in terms of the odds of, uh,
origins of life on earth, I mean,
this all has to do with how special and unique is earth.
What you land in terms of the number of civilizations has to do with how unique
the rare earth hypothesis is, how rare special is,
how rare and special is the solar system.
Like if you had to bet all your money on a,
on a completely unscientific question. Well, no,
actually it's actually a rigorously scientific.
We just don't know a lot of things in that equation.
There's a lot of mysteries about that and it's slowly becoming better and better
understood in terms of exoplanets,
in terms of how many solar systems are out there, where there's planets,
there are Earthlike planets, that's getting better and better understood.
What's your sense from that perspective? Um,
how many alien civilizations out there? So zero or one plus.
You're right. That the equation is, is being better. Understood,
but you're really only talking about the first three parameters in the equation
or something. You know, how many stars are there? How many planets per star,
and then we are just barely scratching the surface of what fraction of those
planets might be habitable. The rest of the terms in the equation are like,
how likely is life to evolve, right. Given habitable conditions,
how likely is it to survive all these things? Um,
<affirmative> there are all these huge unknowns. Actually. I,
I remember when I first saw that equation, I think I was,
I think it was my first year of college and I thought, this is ridiculous.
This is, <laugh> a common sense that didn't need to give, give a name, you know?
Um, and B just a bunch of unknowns.
That's like putting our ignorance together in one equation, but I I've actually,
now I understand this equation, you know,
it's not something we ever necessarily have the answer to it's it just gives us
a framework for having the exact conversation we're having right now.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> and I think that's how it was intended in the first place,
when it was, was put into writing was to, to give people a language,
to communicate about the factors that go into the potential for aliens to
be out there and for us to find them, um, I,
I would put money on their being aliens.
I would not put money on
us having definitive evidence of them in my lifetime.
Well, definitive is a funny, is a funny word. Cause uh,
my sense is this is the saddest part for me is
my sense in terms of intelligent alien civilizations,
I feel like we're so we're so self-obsessed
that we literally would not be able to detect them even when they're like in
front of us, like, like trees, cabals,
but just their intelligence could be, um,
realized on a scale on a time scale or physical scale that
we're not appreciating. Like trees could be way more intelligent than us.
I don't know. It's just a dumb example. It could be rocks rock,
or it could be things like the, this, I love this.
This is Dawkins memes.
It could be that ideas are the like ideas would have,
like where do ideas come from? Where do thoughts come from?
Maybe thoughts are the aliens or maybe thoughts is
the actual mechanisms of communication in, uh, physics, right?
It's just like,
we think of thoughts as something that Springs up from neurons firing where the
hell they come from. And now what about consciousness?
Maybe consciousness is the communication. It sounds like ridiculous,
but like we're, so self-centered on this, uh, space,
time communication and physical space using like written language,
like spoken with audio <laugh> to on a time scale.
That's very specific on a physical scale. That's very specific. Uh, so,
so I, I tend to think that, uh, bacteria will probably recognize like,
like moving organisms will probably recognize,
but when that forms itself into intelligence,
most likely will be robots of some kind, cuz we won't be meeting the origins,
we'll be meeting the creations of those intelligence is we just would not be
able to, uh, to appreciate it. And that's the saddest thing to me that, uh,
we, we, yeah, we we're too dumb.
<laugh> the sea aliens, uh, like we're too, we kind of think like,
look at the progress of science,
we've accomplished so much the sad thing it could be that we're just like in the
first 0.0, zero, zero 1% of understanding anything it's humbling. I.
Hope that's true. Hope because I feel like we're very ignorant as a species.
And I hope that our current level of knowledge only represents the 0.001% of
what we will someday achieve. That actually feels optimistic to me. <laugh>.
Well that I feel like that's easier for us to comprehend in the space of biology
and not as easy to comprehend in the space of physics, for example,
because we have a sense that like we have, I, it like, if you,
if you talk to theoretical physicists,
they have a sense that we understand the basic laws that form
the nature of reality of our universe, but it,
so there's much more comp like physicists are much more confident.
<laugh> biologists are like, uh,
this is a squishy mess. We're doing our best, uh, physicists,
but I would be,
it'd be fascinating to see if physicists themselves would also be humble by
there being like, what the hell is dark matter and dark energy? What,
what the hell is the, not just the origin of the, not just the big bang,
but all, everything that happened since the big bang,
a lot of things that happened since the big bang,
we have no ideas about except basic models of physics. Right. Or what.
Happened before the big bang? What, yeah.
Yeah. What happened before or what's happening inside the black hole?
Why is there a black hole at the side of our galaxy?
Cause somebody answered this a super massive black hole.
Nobody knows how it started and they seem to be like in the mid of all galaxies.
Um, so that could be a portal for aliens to communicate through con okay. Um,
all right. Back to planets. <laugh> how, um,
what's your favorite outside of earth? What's your favorite planet or moon?
Maybe outside of the ones. Well first have we talked about it already or,
and then if we did mention it, what's the one outside of that. Oh gosh.
I have to come up with another favorite. That's not IO. Oh.
IO is the favorite. Oh absolutely. Why is IO the favorite?
I mean basically everything I've, I've already said, it's just such a,
an amazing and unique object. Um,
but on I guess a personal note,
probably the object that made me become a planetary scientist.
It's the first thing in the solar system that really deeply captured my
interest. Um, and when I started my PhD,
I wanted to be an astrophysicist working on things like galaxy evolution,
um, and sort of slowly I had done some projects in the solar system,
but IO was the thing that like really caught me into doing solar system science.
Okay. Let's, let's leave, uh, moons aside. What's your favorite planet?
It sounds like you like moons better than planets. So it's.
Uh, that's accurate. Um, but the planets are, are fascinating. I think,
you know, I find that the planets and the solar system really fascinating.
What I like about the moons is that they there's so much less,
that is known. There's still a lot more discoveries for,
and the questions that we can ask are, are still the, the bigger questions.
Gotcha. Um, which, you know, I,
and maybe I'm being unfair to the planets because we are still trying to
understand things like was there ever life on Mars? And that is a huge question.
And one that we've sent numerous robots to Mars to try to answer.
So maybe I'm being unfair to the planet, but,
but there is certainly quite a bit more information, uh,
that we have about the planets than the moons. But I mean, Venus is,
is a fascinating object.
So I like the objects that lie at the extremes.
I think that if we can make a, a sort of theory or,
or like I've been saying framework for an are standing planets and moons that
can incorporate even the most extreme ones, then, you know,
those are the things that really test your theory and test your understanding.
And so they they've always really fascinated me,
not so much the nice habitable places like earth,
but these extreme places like Venus that have, um,
sulfuric acid cloud and just incredibly hot and dense surfaces and Venus,
of course, I, I love volcanism for some reason. And,
and Venus has probably has volcanic activity definitely has in their recent
past, maybe has ongoing today.